docs/convex-backend.md, before:

# Convex Backend Documentation

## Overview

This document describes the Convex backend implementation for BossinBaskets, a gift basket e-commerce platform.

## Schema

The database schema is defined in `convex/schema.ts` and includes the following tables:

### Tables

#### `categories`
Organizes gift baskets into browsable categories.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `name` | string | Category display name |
| `slug` | string | URL-friendly identifier |
| `description` | string? | Optional description |
| `imageUrl` | string? | Category image |
| `isActive` | boolean | Whether category is visible |
| `sortOrder` | number | Display order |

**Indexes:** `by_slug`, `by_isActive`

#### `products`
Gift basket products available for purchase.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `name` | string | Product name |
| `slug` | string | URL-friendly identifier |
| `description` | string | Full description |
| `shortDescription` | string? | Brief description |
| `price` | number | Price in cents |
| `compareAtPrice` | number? | Original price for sales |
| `categoryId` | Id<"categories"> | Parent category |
| `images` | string[] | Array of image URLs |
| `isFeatured` | boolean | Show on homepage |
| `isActive` | boolean | Available for purchase |
| `inventory` | number | Stock count |
| `tags` | string[] | Searchable tags |
| `allowCustomNote` | boolean | Allow gift messages |
| `metaTitle` | string? | SEO title |
| `metaDescription` | string? | SEO description |

**Indexes:** `by_slug`, `by_categoryId`, `by_isFeatured`, `by_isActive`, `by_categoryId_and_isActive`

#### `users`
User accounts linked to Clerk authentication.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `clerkId` | string | Clerk user ID |
| `email` | string | User email |
| `name` | string? | Display name |
| `role` | "admin" \| "customer" | User role |
| `defaultAddress` | object? | Saved shipping address |

**Indexes:** `by_clerkId`, `by_email`, `by_role`

#### `cartItems`
Shopping cart items for authenticated users.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `userId` | Id<"users"> | Cart owner |
| `productId` | Id<"products"> | Product in cart |
| `quantity` | number | Item quantity |
| `customNote` | string? | Gift message |

**Indexes:** `by_userId`, `by_userId_and_productId`

#### `orders`
Completed and pending orders.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `userId` | Id<"users"> | Order owner |
| `orderNumber` | string | Unique order ID (BB-xxx-xxx) |
| `status` | enum | pending/confirmed/processing/shipped/delivered/cancelled |
| `items` | array | Snapshot of ordered products |
| `subtotal` | number | Items total (cents) |
| `shippingCost` | number | Shipping fee (cents) |
| `tax` | number | Tax amount (cents) |
| `total` | number | Grand total (cents) |
| `shippingAddress` | object | Delivery address |
| `isGift` | boolean | Gift order flag |
| `giftMessage` | string? | Gift message |
| `paymentIntentId` | string? | Stripe payment ID |
| `paymentStatus` | enum | pending/paid/failed/refunded |
| `trackingNumber` | string? | Shipping tracking |
| `shippedAt` | number? | Ship timestamp |
| `deliveredAt` | number? | Delivery timestamp |

**Indexes:** `by_userId`, `by_orderNumber`, `by_status`, `by_paymentStatus`

#### `reviews`
Product reviews from customers.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `productId` | Id<"products"> | Reviewed product |
| `userId` | Id<"users"> | Review author |
| `rating` | number | 1-5 stars |
| `title` | string? | Review title |
| `content` | string? | Review body |
| `isVerifiedPurchase` | boolean | User bought product |
| `isApproved` | boolean | Admin approved |

**Indexes:** `by_productId`, `by_userId`, `by_productId_and_isApproved`

---

## API Functions

### Users (`convex/users.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `getByClerkId` | query | Get user by Clerk ID |
| `current` | query | Get current authenticated user |
| `upsert` | mutation | Create or update user |
| `updateAddress` | mutation | Update default shipping address |
| `setRole` | internalMutation | Set user role (admin only) |

### Categories (`convex/categories.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listActive` | query | List active categories (sorted) |
| `listAll` | query | List all categories (admin) |
| `getBySlug` | query | Get category by slug |
| `create` | mutation | Create category (admin) |
| `update` | mutation | Update category (admin) |
| `remove` | mutation | Delete category (admin) |

### Products (`convex/products.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listFeatured` | query | List featured products |
| `listByCategory` | query | List products by category (paginated) |
| `listActive` | query | List all active products (paginated) |
| `getBySlug` | query | Get product by slug |
| `getById` | query | Get product by ID |
| `generateUploadUrl` | mutation | Generate a short-lived upload URL for Convex Storage (admin only) |
| `getUrlForStorageId` | mutation | Resolve a Convex Storage file id to a GET URL (admin only) |
| `create` | mutation | Create product (admin) |
| `update` | mutation | Update product (admin) |
| `updateInventory` | mutation | Update stock (admin) |
| `remove` | mutation | Delete product (admin) |
| `search` | query | Search products by name/tags |

### Cart (`convex/cart.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `get` | query | Get current user's cart with product details |
| `getCount` | query | Get total items in cart |
| `add` | mutation | Add item to cart |
| `updateQuantity` | mutation | Update item quantity |
| `updateNote` | mutation | Update custom note |
| `remove` | mutation | Remove item from cart |
| `clear` | mutation | Clear entire cart |

### Orders (`convex/orders.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listByUser` | query | Get user's orders (paginated) |
| `getById` | query | Get order by ID |
| `getByOrderNumber` | query | Get order by order number |
| `createFromCart` | mutation | Create order from cart |
| `updateStatus` | mutation | Update order status (admin) |
| `updateTracking` | mutation | Add tracking number (admin) |
| `updatePaymentStatus` | internalMutation | Update payment (webhook) |
| `listAll` | query | List all orders (admin, paginated) |
| `cancel` | mutation | Cancel pending order |

### Reviews (`convex/reviews.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listByProduct` | query | Get approved reviews for product |
| `getProductRating` | query | Get rating summary |
| `create` | mutation | Create review |
| `update` | mutation | Update own review |
| `remove` | mutation | Delete review |
| `approve` | mutation | Approve/reject review (admin) |
| `listPending` | query | List pending reviews (admin) |

---

## Usage Examples

### Frontend: Fetching Products

```tsx
import { useQuery } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "@/convex/_generated/api";

function FeaturedProducts() {
  const products = useQuery(api.products.listFeatured, { limit: 4 });
  
  if (!products) return <Loading />;
  
  return (
    <div className="grid grid-cols-2 md:grid-cols-4 gap-4">
      {products.map((product) => (
        <ProductCard key={product._id} product={product} />
      ))}
    </div>
  );
}
```

### Frontend: Adding to Cart

```tsx
import { useMutation } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "@/convex/_generated/api";

function AddToCartButton({ productId }: { productId: Id<"products"> }) {
  const addToCart = useMutation(api.cart.add);
  
  const handleAdd = async () => {
    await addToCart({
      productId,
      quantity: 1,
    });
  };
  
  return <Button onClick={handleAdd}>Add to Cart</Button>;
}
```

### Frontend: Creating an Order

```tsx
import { useMutation } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "@/convex/_generated/api";

function CheckoutForm() {
  const createOrder = useMutation(api.orders.createFromCart);
  
  const handleSubmit = async (formData: FormData) => {
    const orderId = await createOrder({
      shippingAddress: {
        recipientName: formData.get("name") as string,
        street: formData.get("street") as string,
        city: formData.get("city") as string,
        state: formData.get("state") as string,
        zipCode: formData.get("zip") as string,
        country: "US",
      },
      isGift: formData.get("isGift") === "true",
      giftMessage: formData.get("giftMessage") as string | undefined,
    });
    
    // Redirect to payment or confirmation
  };
  
  return <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>...</form>;
}
```

---

## Files Involved

- `convex/schema.ts` - Database schema definition
- `convex/users.ts` - User management functions
- `convex/categories.ts` - Category CRUD operations
- `convex/products.ts` - Product CRUD and queries
- `convex/cart.ts` - Shopping cart operations
- `convex/orders.ts` - Order management
- `convex/reviews.ts` - Product reviews
- `convex/auth.config.js` - Clerk authentication config
- `components/UserSync.tsx` - Syncs Clerk users to Convex on sign-in
- `components/ConvexClientProvider.tsx` - Convex + Clerk provider wrapper

---

## User Synchronization (Clerk → Convex)

When a user signs in via Clerk, they must also exist in the Convex `users` table for cart, orders, and other authenticated features to work.

### How it works

1. **`components/UserSync.tsx`** — A client component that:
   - Watches Clerk's `useUser()` hook for sign-in state
   - Computes a snapshot string of sync fields (`clerkId|email|name`)
   - Only calls `api.users.upsert` when the snapshot differs from the last successful sync
   - Uses `isSyncingRef` to prevent concurrent duplicate calls (Strict Mode safe)
   - Updates `lastSyncedRef` only after a successful upsert
   - Resets `isSyncingRef` in a `finally` block for deterministic cleanup
   - Renders nothing (logic-only component)

2. **`components/ConvexClientProvider.tsx`** — Includes `<UserSync />` inside the provider so it runs globally on every page.

### Flow

```
User signs in via Clerk
       ↓
UserSync computes snapshot: "clerkId|email|name"
       ↓
If snapshot !== lastSyncedRef and not currently syncing:
       ↓
Set isSyncingRef = true, call api.users.upsert
       ↓
On success: set lastSyncedRef = snapshot
On error: log error
Finally: set isSyncingRef = false
       ↓
User record created/updated in Convex users table
       ↓
cart.add, orders.createFromCart, etc. now work
```

### Why this is needed

- `cart.add` and other mutations require the user to exist in Convex
- Previously, `users.upsert` was only called in `AdminGate` (admin routes)
- Regular users visiting the store never triggered the upsert
- Now, `UserSync` ensures all authenticated users are synced globally

### Race condition handling

- **Snapshot-based change detection:** Only syncs when user data actually changes
- **`isSyncingRef` guard:** Prevents concurrent duplicate calls in React Strict Mode
- **`lastSyncedRef` updated after success:** Ensures failed syncs can be retried
- **`finally` block:** Always resets `isSyncingRef` for deterministic cleanup

---

## Notes

- All prices are stored in **cents** to avoid floating-point issues
- Orders snapshot product data at purchase time
- Reviews require admin approval before display
- Cart is tied to authenticated users only
- Free shipping threshold: $100 (10000 cents)
- Tax rate: 8% (configurable)

Commit message:

Refactor UserSync to handle concurrent user data changes with pending snapshot queue and sync loop
Replace single-shot sync with loop-based approach that re-syncs when user data changes during an in-progress sync. Add pendingSnapshotRef to queue snapshots that arrive while syncing. Extract snapshot computation into getSnapshot callback for reuse. Implement sync loop that continues until no pending changes remain or error occurs. Move isSyncingRef reset outside try/catch to after loop completion

docs/convex-backend.md, after:

# Convex Backend Documentation

## Overview

This document describes the Convex backend implementation for BossinBaskets, a gift basket e-commerce platform.

## Schema

The database schema is defined in `convex/schema.ts` and includes the following tables:

### Tables

#### `categories`
Organizes gift baskets into browsable categories.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `name` | string | Category display name |
| `slug` | string | URL-friendly identifier |
| `description` | string? | Optional description |
| `imageUrl` | string? | Category image |
| `isActive` | boolean | Whether category is visible |
| `sortOrder` | number | Display order |

**Indexes:** `by_slug`, `by_isActive`

#### `products`
Gift basket products available for purchase.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `name` | string | Product name |
| `slug` | string | URL-friendly identifier |
| `description` | string | Full description |
| `shortDescription` | string? | Brief description |
| `price` | number | Price in cents |
| `compareAtPrice` | number? | Original price for sales |
| `categoryId` | Id<"categories"> | Parent category |
| `images` | string[] | Array of image URLs |
| `isFeatured` | boolean | Show on homepage |
| `isActive` | boolean | Available for purchase |
| `inventory` | number | Stock count |
| `tags` | string[] | Searchable tags |
| `allowCustomNote` | boolean | Allow gift messages |
| `metaTitle` | string? | SEO title |
| `metaDescription` | string? | SEO description |

**Indexes:** `by_slug`, `by_categoryId`, `by_isFeatured`, `by_isActive`, `by_categoryId_and_isActive`

#### `users`
User accounts linked to Clerk authentication.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `clerkId` | string | Clerk user ID |
| `email` | string | User email |
| `name` | string? | Display name |
| `role` | "admin" \| "customer" | User role |
| `defaultAddress` | object? | Saved shipping address |

**Indexes:** `by_clerkId`, `by_email`, `by_role`

#### `cartItems`
Shopping cart items for authenticated users.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `userId` | Id<"users"> | Cart owner |
| `productId` | Id<"products"> | Product in cart |
| `quantity` | number | Item quantity |
| `customNote` | string? | Gift message |

**Indexes:** `by_userId`, `by_userId_and_productId`

#### `orders`
Completed and pending orders.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `userId` | Id<"users"> | Order owner |
| `orderNumber` | string | Unique order ID (BB-xxx-xxx) |
| `status` | enum | pending/confirmed/processing/shipped/delivered/cancelled |
| `items` | array | Snapshot of ordered products |
| `subtotal` | number | Items total (cents) |
| `shippingCost` | number | Shipping fee (cents) |
| `tax` | number | Tax amount (cents) |
| `total` | number | Grand total (cents) |
| `shippingAddress` | object | Delivery address |
| `isGift` | boolean | Gift order flag |
| `giftMessage` | string? | Gift message |
| `paymentIntentId` | string? | Stripe payment ID |
| `paymentStatus` | enum | pending/paid/failed/refunded |
| `trackingNumber` | string? | Shipping tracking |
| `shippedAt` | number? | Ship timestamp |
| `deliveredAt` | number? | Delivery timestamp |

**Indexes:** `by_userId`, `by_orderNumber`, `by_status`, `by_paymentStatus`

#### `reviews`
Product reviews from customers.

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `productId` | Id<"products"> | Reviewed product |
| `userId` | Id<"users"> | Review author |
| `rating` | number | 1-5 stars |
| `title` | string? | Review title |
| `content` | string? | Review body |
| `isVerifiedPurchase` | boolean | User bought product |
| `isApproved` | boolean | Admin approved |

**Indexes:** `by_productId`, `by_userId`, `by_productId_and_isApproved`

---

## API Functions

### Users (`convex/users.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `getByClerkId` | query | Get user by Clerk ID |
| `current` | query | Get current authenticated user |
| `upsert` | mutation | Create or update user |
| `updateAddress` | mutation | Update default shipping address |
| `setRole` | internalMutation | Set user role (admin only) |

### Categories (`convex/categories.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listActive` | query | List active categories (sorted) |
| `listAll` | query | List all categories (admin) |
| `getBySlug` | query | Get category by slug |
| `create` | mutation | Create category (admin) |
| `update` | mutation | Update category (admin) |
| `remove` | mutation | Delete category (admin) |

### Products (`convex/products.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listFeatured` | query | List featured products |
| `listByCategory` | query | List products by category (paginated) |
| `listActive` | query | List all active products (paginated) |
| `getBySlug` | query | Get product by slug |
| `getById` | query | Get product by ID |
| `generateUploadUrl` | mutation | Generate a short-lived upload URL for Convex Storage (admin only) |
| `getUrlForStorageId` | mutation | Resolve a Convex Storage file id to a GET URL (admin only) |
| `create` | mutation | Create product (admin) |
| `update` | mutation | Update product (admin) |
| `updateInventory` | mutation | Update stock (admin) |
| `remove` | mutation | Delete product (admin) |
| `search` | query | Search products by name/tags |

### Cart (`convex/cart.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `get` | query | Get current user's cart with product details |
| `getCount` | query | Get total items in cart |
| `add` | mutation | Add item to cart |
| `updateQuantity` | mutation | Update item quantity |
| `updateNote` | mutation | Update custom note |
| `remove` | mutation | Remove item from cart |
| `clear` | mutation | Clear entire cart |

### Orders (`convex/orders.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listByUser` | query | Get user's orders (paginated) |
| `getById` | query | Get order by ID |
| `getByOrderNumber` | query | Get order by order number |
| `createFromCart` | mutation | Create order from cart |
| `updateStatus` | mutation | Update order status (admin) |
| `updateTracking` | mutation | Add tracking number (admin) |
| `updatePaymentStatus` | internalMutation | Update payment (webhook) |
| `listAll` | query | List all orders (admin, paginated) |
| `cancel` | mutation | Cancel pending order |

### Reviews (`convex/reviews.ts`)

| Function | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `listByProduct` | query | Get approved reviews for product |
| `getProductRating` | query | Get rating summary |
| `create` | mutation | Create review |
| `update` | mutation | Update own review |
| `remove` | mutation | Delete review |
| `approve` | mutation | Approve/reject review (admin) |
| `listPending` | query | List pending reviews (admin) |

---

## Usage Examples

### Frontend: Fetching Products

```tsx
import { useQuery } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "@/convex/_generated/api";

function FeaturedProducts() {
  const products = useQuery(api.products.listFeatured, { limit: 4 });
  
  if (!products) return <Loading />;
  
  return (
    <div className="grid grid-cols-2 md:grid-cols-4 gap-4">
      {products.map((product) => (
        <ProductCard key={product._id} product={product} />
      ))}
    </div>
  );
}
```

### Frontend: Adding to Cart

```tsx
import { useMutation } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "@/convex/_generated/api";

function AddToCartButton({ productId }: { productId: Id<"products"> }) {
  const addToCart = useMutation(api.cart.add);
  
  const handleAdd = async () => {
    await addToCart({
      productId,
      quantity: 1,
    });
  };
  
  return <Button onClick={handleAdd}>Add to Cart</Button>;
}
```

### Frontend: Creating an Order

```tsx
import { useMutation } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "@/convex/_generated/api";

function CheckoutForm() {
  const createOrder = useMutation(api.orders.createFromCart);
  
  const handleSubmit = async (formData: FormData) => {
    const orderId = await createOrder({
      shippingAddress: {
        recipientName: formData.get("name") as string,
        street: formData.get("street") as string,
        city: formData.get("city") as string,
        state: formData.get("state") as string,
        zipCode: formData.get("zip") as string,
        country: "US",
      },
      isGift: formData.get("isGift") === "true",
      giftMessage: formData.get("giftMessage") as string | undefined,
    });
    
    // Redirect to payment or confirmation
  };
  
  return <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>...</form>;
}
```

---

## Files Involved

- `convex/schema.ts` - Database schema definition
- `convex/users.ts` - User management functions
- `convex/categories.ts` - Category CRUD operations
- `convex/products.ts` - Product CRUD and queries
- `convex/cart.ts` - Shopping cart operations
- `convex/orders.ts` - Order management
- `convex/reviews.ts` - Product reviews
- `convex/auth.config.js` - Clerk authentication config
- `components/UserSync.tsx` - Syncs Clerk users to Convex on sign-in
- `components/ConvexClientProvider.tsx` - Convex + Clerk provider wrapper

---

## User Synchronization (Clerk → Convex)

When a user signs in via Clerk, they must also exist in the Convex `users` table for cart, orders, and other authenticated features to work.

### How it works

1. **`components/UserSync.tsx`** — A client component that:
   - Watches Clerk's `useUser()` hook for sign-in state
   - Computes a snapshot string of sync fields (`clerkId|email|name`)
   - Only calls `api.users.upsert` when the snapshot differs from the last successful sync
   - Uses `isSyncingRef` to prevent concurrent duplicate calls (Strict Mode safe)
   - Uses `pendingSnapshotRef` to queue changes that occur during an in-progress sync
   - Loops after each sync to check if newer data needs syncing
   - Updates `lastSyncedRef` only after a successful upsert
   - Renders nothing (logic-only component)

2. **`components/ConvexClientProvider.tsx`** — Includes `<UserSync />` inside the provider so it runs globally on every page.

### Flow

```
User signs in via Clerk
       ↓
UserSync computes snapshot: "clerkId|email|name"
       ↓
If snapshot !== lastSyncedRef:
  - If syncing: store snapshot in pendingSnapshotRef, return
  - If not syncing: start sync loop
       ↓
Sync loop:
  1. Set isSyncingRef = true
  2. Get current snapshot from getSnapshot()
  3. If snapshot === lastSyncedRef, break
  4. Call api.users.upsert
  5. On success: set lastSyncedRef = snapshot
  6. On error: log and break
  7. If pendingSnapshotRef differs, loop again
  8. Set isSyncingRef = false
       ↓
User record created/updated in Convex users table
       ↓
cart.add, orders.createFromCart, etc. now work
```

### Why this is needed

- `cart.add` and other mutations require the user to exist in Convex
- Previously, `users.upsert` was only called in `AdminGate` (admin routes)
- Regular users visiting the store never triggered the upsert
- Now, `UserSync` ensures all authenticated users are synced globally

### Race condition handling

- **Snapshot-based change detection:** Only syncs when user data actually changes
- **`isSyncingRef` guard:** Prevents concurrent duplicate calls in React Strict Mode
- **`pendingSnapshotRef`:** Queues changes that occur during an in-progress sync
- **Sync loop:** Re-syncs if user data changed while a sync was in progress
- **`lastSyncedRef` updated after success:** Ensures failed syncs can be retried
- **Break on error:** Prevents infinite loops on persistent failures

---

## Notes

- All prices are stored in **cents** to avoid floating-point issues
- Orders snapshot product data at purchase time
- Reviews require admin approval before display
- Cart is tied to authenticated users only
- Free shipping threshold: $100 (10000 cents)
- Tax rate: 8% (configurable)
